This post is written by Ernesto Reyes, GDP Sector Lead for Dairy Development, Global Dairy Platform In conjunction with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the Global Agenda for Sustainable Livestock (GASL), the International Farm Comparison Network (IFCN), and Global Dairy Platform (GDP) developed the first in a series of research papers on how dairy can help with socio-economic challenges articulated in the UN Agenda 2030 and the SDGs. The paper, “Dairy Development’s Impact on Poverty Reduction,” examines the important role dairy development plays in lifting rural families and communities out of poverty. The study provides quantitative evidence that dairy cow ownership or improvements in production can significantly contribute to SDG1 – No Poverty. Key findings include: Throughout 2019, GDP has again worked with FAO, GASL and IFCN to develop the second research paper in the series, “Dairy’s Impact on Reducing Global Hunger,” which demonstrates the role dairying plays in tackling SDG2 – Zero Hunger. The study has been completed and the report is currently undergoing final approvals by FAO’s Copyright Department and should be published soon. Highlights include: These two research papers provide clear evidence that dairy development is a useful instrument to achieve SDG2 – Zero Hunger, while simultaneously supporting SDG1 – No Poverty. For more information, please contact Ernesto Reyes, GDP Sector Lead for Dairy Development: Ernesto.Reyes@ifcndairy.org (link sends e-mail). GDP is a not-for-profit industry association representing the global dairy sector. GDP’s membership includes more than 95 leading dairy cooperatives, companies, associations, scientific bodies and other partners that collaborate pre-competitively to lead and build evidence on dairy’s role in a sustainable diet. GDP members produce nearly 32 percent of the world’s milk, with operations in more than 150 countries. Building on this evidence that dairy sector development results in significant positive impacts on poverty reduction and nutrition, we have paired this Global Dairy Platform post with a short video shared by our valued partner, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. The video highlights how a partnership with private sector dairy processors, small-scale dairy producers, and the government can empower women, improve nutrition, and transform the livelihoods of dairying communities in Oyo and Kano states in Nigeria. 