This post is written by Isabelle Dieuzy-Labaye, Senior Advisor, World Organisation for Animal Health The impact of livestock disease undermines productivity and resilience of the livestock sector. Resource-limited public animal health services often struggle to meet growing disease control demands placed upon them. In response, the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) has developed a public-private partnership handbook to guide stakeholders wishing to foster collaborations to expand animal health services capacity. The burden of livestock disease negatively impacts the livelihoods, health and nutrition of millions of poor households. This effectively reduces the resilience of livestock producers and others in the livestock value chain and can have negative impacts across the food system, not least on consumers. Rapid expansion of livestock sectors and increased consumption of animal source foods in many lower- and middle-income countries has implications for disease transmission risks with a resulting increased need for animal health services. Where public resources are limited, creative partnerships and novel resourcing mechanisms with the private sector may provide cost-effective and impactful solutions. These partnerships offer possibilities to leverage capacities and expertise to meet the growing demand for animal health services. Public-private partnership, or PPP, is a joint approach in which the public and private sectors agree on responsibilities and share resources and risks to achieve common objectives that deliver benefits in a sustainable manner. PPP already exist in the veterinary domain, but much more can be achieved to unleash its potential. Discover some concrete examples which could inspire the implementation of new PPPs in your country. Fields of application are many: disease surveillance and control, emergency preparedness, control of antimicrobial resistance, meat inspection, vaccine development and delivery and many other services relating to animal production. Based on existing experience, these are the types of impacts that PPP can provide:  Let’s see how the World Organisation for Animal Health can support you in the development of impactful and sustainable PPPs in the veterinary domain. The OIE has developed a tool which will help both public and private stakeholders initiate, develop and implement professional, equitable and durable partnerships. The OIE PPP Handbook is a concise and pragmatic set of guidelines, drawing from success stories of PPPs from several countries all around the world. More efficient and sustainable services in support of animal health and welfare worldwide. Join the rapidly expanding community of professionals in animal health who consider that public-private partnerships are essential to enhance the efficiency of their projects in the field. Regional OIE PPP workshops are running in Africa and Asia to disseminate OIE guidelines, with participants from both public and private sectors working together to develop business cases for successful PPPs in the veterinary domain.  Follow the on-line 1-hour OIE PPP e-learning class, developed in partnership with EuFMD, and learn more on the PPP typology and the different types of PPPs which you could envision to attain your objectives and contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Get started on PPP and fully exploit the potential of partnering between the public and the private sectors towards better veterinary services in the field! More information and videos on real cases on the OIE PPP website: www.oie.int/publicprivatepartnerships This work is led by the OIE in collaboration with Cirad and supported by a grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.