2019 Small Grants Request for Applications Partners of the Americas, with funding from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), is seeking applications from parties interested in the F2F AVOP Small Grants Program. 2019 F2F AVOP REQUEST FOR APPLICATIONS SOLICITATION (CLICK HERE) The RFA will be conducted in 2 phases: The USAID-funded John Ogonowski and Doug Bereuter Farmer-to-Farmer (F2F) Agricultural Volunteer Opportunity Program (AVOP) provides small grant funding available for international development programs focused on expert volunteer technical assistance. The total amount of funding available under this RFA for all awards is $1,839,000. Applicants may submit proposals for three (3) year projects limited to a maximum budget of $613,000. F2F emphasizes achieving economic impact and measurable results through technical assistance provided by highly-skilled volunteers. Assignments can concentrate on specific geographic areas, commodities programs, and service sectors. Programs go beyond simply placing volunteers on an individual basis and focus on developing specific market chains for which overall impact can be evaluated. Programs build institutions and transfer technology and management expertise to link smallholder farmers with markets that make use of comparative advantages in production, processing, and marketing. Volunteers typically work with medium and small agro-enterprises, cooperatives, individual producers, agricultural extension and research agencies, and financial institutions. Major areas of program focus are: horticulture, dairy and livestock, staple food crops, producer organization development, financial services, marketing and processing, agricultural education and training, and natural resources management. A key component of F2F programs is that they are demand-driven by local host organizations and their evolving needs. May 31, 2019  | Concept Note RFA Available Online June 27, 2019, 12PM EST  | Last Call for Questions June 28, 2019, 2PM EST | Live Q&A Webinar July 15, 2019, 6PM EST | Concept Note Due Concept Note applications must be submitted using the online form here: https://iglhrrlmdt.formstack.com/forms/avop_rfa All technical questions are to be submitted in writing via e-mail by June 27, 2019, 12PM EST to avop@partners.net (link sends e-mail).