The contributions of wild-caught fisheries to livelihoods, nutrition and resilience in sub-Saharan Africa are too big to ignore.  A new USAID report entitled “The Role of Wild-Caught Fisheries in African Development” outlines the ways this critical component of a vibrant agricultural sector provides nutritious, affordable food for over 400 million people, employs a workforce of several million and generates billions of dollars in revenue for both coastal and inland countries while supporting community resilience. The report is from USAID’s Biodiversity Results and Integrated Development Gains Enhanced (BRIDGE) project, which promotes and supports the integration of biodiversity conservation with key development sectors such as food security. Biodiversity conservation is fundamental to human well-being as natural ecosystems provide the goods and services that underpin sustainable development.  Improved management of and increased investment in Africa’s wild-caught fisheries is a productive and efficient means of addressing food security while enhancing the availability of wild-caught fish, an affordable source of protein and other nutrients. Wild-caught Fisheries Support Food Security Below are three ways wild-caught fisheries can enhance Feed the Future’s work in Africa: Wild-caught Fisheries Are Under Threat and Are Too Big to Ignore Despite their important contributions to livelihoods, nutrition and community resilience, poor management and overexploitation of wild-caught fisheries have led to diminishing natural productivity, fish catches and economic security. The World Bank estimates that African countries are losing $10 billion in revenues each year due to poor fisheries management. Factors that contribute to poor management include lack of secure tenure to fishing grounds, inadequate governance and weak institutions. Other significant issues are post-harvest losses, which range from 20 to 50% in some African countries, and food safety concerns due to unsafe handling and processing practices. Declining catches in poorly managed fisheries, especially small-scale fisheries, threaten fatty acid and micronutrient deficiencies in countries such as Mozambique, Ghana, Senegal, Nigeria, Cameroon and Ivory Coast that are highly dependent on nutrients from fish. Farming Sector Strategies Can Improve Wild-caught Fisheries Management Feed the Future’s farming sector strategies can be adapted to 1) promote policies that secure tenure and access to fishing grounds for small-scale fishers, 2) support fisher associations and effective extension services, 3) improve the productivity and profitability of fisheries through proven management practices that increase fish populations and enhance resiliency, and 4) reduce post-harvest losses and improve safe handling and processing practices. Agricultural research strategies should incorporate wild-caught fisheries to harness scientific innovation and technology to improve fisheries management, quantify the contribution of coastal and inland small-scale fisheries to local food security, and analyze options and best practices for nutrition-sensitive fishing policies. The Role of Wild-Caught Fisheries in African Development report builds on previous research outlined in a 2016 Ag Sector Council Seminar that reviewed the evidence on the importance of wild-caught fisheries in Africa, showed how management approaches can restore and enhance the natural productivity and sustainability of coastal fisheries, and described increasing investments by the private sector in this area. USAID Bangladesh’s MACH activity, Senegal’s COMFISH activity and USAID Philippines’ FISH and ECOFISH activities are examples of how successful fisheries management approaches can improve local food security, strengthen livelihoods and increase fish populations. For more information, please contact Kirsten Spainhower (kspainhower@usaid.gov (link sends e-mail)) or Barbara Best (bbest@usaid.gov (link sends e-mail)).