If you are a food security development professional, we hope that you are visiting Agrilinks regularly for blog posts, events, and resources that inform your work. But did you know that you can post too? We especially encourage Feed the Future implementing partners to showcase your key resources and lessons learned through Agrilinks. This post will explain the steps and procedures for posting to Agrilinks. There are guidance docs located in the resource sidebar to help you post to Agrilinks, as well as to help you craft content. If you run into any roadblocks along the way, please feel free to reach out to us at any time by writing to info@agrilinks.org (link sends e-mail) . Creating an Account If you haven’t done so already, you will need to create an account on Agrilinks. To do this, click on the green button titled “Log In,” located on the top right of the home page. Once you click there, you will have the ability to “Create New Account”.  Posting content to Agrilinks Now that you’ve created an account, you have the ability to post to Agrilinks.  The “Post” button is on the upper right-hand corner of the home page. There are two types of posts that you can upload to the site: “Create a Post”, which is a blog-style post or article, and “Add an Event”, which is a post that describes an upcoming event with a link to registration for that event.  Once you click on the type of post, you will be taken to the back-end of the post, where the actual post is created. The instructions at the top of the page will guide you through the posting process. You will first need to create a title. Make sure that the title is catchy, to the point, and gives the reader an idea of the topic. Since you are uploading the post, you will be listed as the author, but in the event that there are multiple authors, there is a section under the title information box where you will be able to add additional authors. In order to add those authors, you will need to know their Agrilinks usernames. If the additional authors do not have an Agrilinks username, simply add a byline at the top of the body of text along the lines of, “This post was written by [Author name] and [Author name] at [Organization name].”  After you add any additional authors, you will be prompted to add the feature image. Images must be between 600x230 and 2000x1500 pixels. This means that images should be landscape rather than portrait layout. After you upload your image, you will be prompted to crop it. All available cropping options (e.g., top of page, thumbnail) must be completed before you can save. To add a caption to the image, enter text into the Photo Caption/Credit field. Once you have uploaded the image, fill in the text box with your content. In this section, you have the ability to add text and images. You can type your content directly into the box, or you can copy and paste the content. If you copy and paste text into the content box, make sure that you highlight all the text once it has been pasted, and click on the icon in the Toolbar Section at the top that is noted as “Tx”. If you would like to add images into the body of the post, select where you would like images to go by placing your cursor in the text area, and clicking on the icon in the toolbar that has an image with a plus sign. You can then select an image from your files, and the alignment for the image. Once the image has been added, right click on the image and select properties, in order to add a caption box to the image.  Once you have completed all of the information that will go into the body of the post, you have the opportunity to add a resource sidebar. These resources can consist of links to other webpages, or downloadable documents such as PDFs, text documents, PowerPoints, or Excel spreadsheets.  After you add items to the resources side bar, you will be asked to tag your post with a topic from the topic list. In order to submit your post for moderation, you must choose at least one topic that best fits with the post.  Your post is almost done! Give everything a look over, and then hit save at the bottom of your screen. Your content will be “submitted for moderation” and the Agrilinks team will have the opportunity to make any content and formatting edits. If we have any questions or concerns about your post, we will reach out to you, through the user contact function on Agrilinks. A message will be sent to the email that is associated with your Agrilinks account. Once you submit your post, Agrilinks will generally review and publish your content within 1-2 days, though we may elect to space content out further to ensure maximum visibility of posts. We look forward to hearing from you, and to reading your great posts. Thanks for sharing!