This is an amended re-issue of the RFP released on 27 March 2019. It has been revised to extend the deadline to 31 July 2019 and to permit ALL implementing partners to apply for this opportunity, regardless of the funder. The SCALE Award is now collecting research proposals from implementing partners, with the aim of building the evidence base for interventions at the intersection of agriculture and the management of water resources. Below are some quick facts about this request, along with links to documents with more details. What is the objective of this research initiative?
The objective of SCALE’s Evidence of Impact Technical Support is to enable implementing organizations to build the evidence base for practices and approaches that have the potential to enhance the impact, sustainability and scalability of FFP-funded emergency or development activities related to agriculture, natural resource management (NRM) and off‐farm livelihoods. What kind of research project will be funded?
This request for research proposals focuses on interventions at the intersection of agriculture and the management of water resources. Illustrative Evidence of Impact studies might include, for example, a comparison study, a piloting of a strategy, an evaluation, or other research approaches. For examples of research subject areas, please see the full description here.
 
How much funding is available?
SCALE plans to cover the costs of research support (up to $50,000) for one Evidence of Impact study under this call. What is the funding for?
This research support can include technical guidance from a research consultant or institution that can assist the successful applicant with research design, data collection, tool development and/or analysis. Such support may be remote, in-country or a combination of both, depending on award needs. The final funding level will depend on context, relevance, quality, needs, availability of funding and competing priorities. Note: No direct funding will be awarded to the successful applicant, SCALE will cover the costs of the consultant and/or research organization with the skills necessary to assist with conducting the chosen study. See full description for details. Who can apply?
Applicants must be organizations that are currently implementing a development or emergency program, regardless of the funder. When is the deadline for applications?
This request for proposals is open from the date of issue and will close at 11:59 pm EDT on 31 July 2019. For more details about this request for research proposals, please refer to the following documents:
SCALE Evidence of Impact Technical Support: Request for Research Proposals
Attachment A: Technical Proposal Requirements
Attachment B: Budget Requirements