The CLIFF-GRADS program invites applications for short-term (4-6 month) scientific training and research on the measurement and management of greenhouse gas emissions and carbon storage in agricultural systems. Students from developing countries1 who are currently enrolled in PhD research related to agricultural greenhouse gas quantification or mitigation are eligible to apply. Research will be conducted in association with CCAFS and GRA scientists’ projects. Applications are requested on either of two themes: Selected students will be sponsored in the amount of 10,000 -12,000 USD. A list of research opportunities available to students is here. The grants can be used to support living and research costs at the host institution and the grant amounts have been determined based on living costs estimated by the institution. Grants may not be used for tuition, university fees or unrelated personal expenses. Read out recently published evaluation of the CLIFF-GRADS program: Outcome evaluation of the Climate, Food and Farming - Global Research Alliance Development Scholarship (CLIFF-GRADS) program CLIFF-GRADS is a joint initiative of the CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security’s (CCAFS) Low Emissions Development Flagship and the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases (GRA). CLIFF-GRADS integrates the Global Research Alliance Development Scholarship and the Climate Food and Farming Research Network with the common goal of providing grants to PhD students in developing countries to expand their knowledge and experience in quantification of agricultural greenhouse gases. Research projects are hosted by CCAFS and GRA members and partners. Funding for CLIFF-GRADS is provided by the Government of New Zealand, USAID and by the CGIAR Trust Fund and bilateral agreements in support of CCAFS. To have their application reviewed, applicants must complete the CLIFF-GRADS Student Application online survey and submit the necessary documentation as described below to cliffgrads@globalresearchalliance.org (link sends e-mail). Applications must be in English and include the following documents merged into one PDF file: The motivation letter, which must be no more than two A4 pages, must include the following: The deadline for applications is September 30, 2019.  You may submit your application by email to cliffgrads@globalresearchalliance.org (link sends e-mail). Please also contact this email address for any questions regarding the CLIFF-GRADS scholarship programme. Applicants will be selected based on three criteria: Successful applicants will be matched with a project and notified by email by late November, 2019. Please visit these websites before preparing your application. 1 - Includes all countries listed as “low-income economies’’, “lower-middle-income economies”, “upper-middle income economies” and “Latin America and the Caribbean” by the World Bank: http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-and-lending-groups