International Women’s Day (IWD) is a time for us, as an international development community, to take stock of development programming to ensure we think equal, build smart, innovate for change—the UN's IWD theme for 2019. This includes preventing and responding to gender-based violence, which affects an estimated one-third of women worldwide. In agricultural communities and markets, as in other sectors, gender-based violence contributes to decreased productivity and reduced economic output. Violence and harassment prevent women from fully participating in and benefiting from agricultural systems, contributes to reduced food security and adversely affects individual, family and community health. Most stakeholders now recognize women’s empowerment and increased productivity in agriculture as essential to a sustainable global food system. Governments and donors have prioritized improving women’s access to land, credit, technology and training, but these efforts will be less effective if we do not simultaneously prevent and respond to gender-based violence in this sector. Given the pervasiveness of the issue, donors, implementers and governments must work together to identify the extent of gender-based violence in the agriculture sector and develop strategies and approaches to prevent and respond to it. In a recent rapid learning needs assessment conducted by the Feed the Future Advancing Women’s Empowerment (AWE) Program, USAID staff said they needed more capacity to prevent and respond to gender-based violence. The AWE Program can help by: In 2018, AWE promoted conversations about gender-based violence prevention and response in agriculture through our involvement in the 16 Days campaign. We participated in a Twitter relay and held a discussion with experts on survivor-centered approaches. The AWE Program is helping move this sector forward by developing indicators, training and tools to support risk mitigation, root causes and responsibility for women’s safe participation in agriculture, at all levels of the sector. We are excited to collaborate with missions, implementing partners, the Bureau for Food Security and USAID offices to make agriculture a safer and more productive sector.