This post was written by John McCormack, Senior Advisor Agribusiness, Food Security, and Livelihoods at World Vision. The development and operation of a public advisory and extension service system is a challenge for many governments, not least for a newly independent state such as Kosovo. In this regard, the development of Kosovo Advisory Services for Agriculture and Rural Development (KASARD[1]) provides an example of extension and advisory service development, implementation and alignment with EU Farm Advisory Service (FAS[2]) modalities and leveraging of private sector service delivery all in the context of a pluralistic service model. EU[3] support to the development of KASARD, through the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, has enabled capacity development and the implementation of a pluralistic model in Kosovo. The overall objective of KASARD is to further add value and utilization of the advisory services and contribute to improvements in the wider economy by improved access to and uptake of services. The following narrative outlines the principles engaged in identification of extension messaging and its delivery through municipal information centers (MIC). The delivery of extension messages and advisory services to farmers in Kosovo is through both public and private sector providers. KASARD is supporting the development of the delivery of extension to farmers though the MIC public sector system around which a specific extension messaging is developed according to the agriculture calendar season. It is then implemented through five pilot municipalities of a system that relies heavily on correct identification of specific issue. It then relies on the development of an action plan by the adviser for the agricultural calendar year to deliver that extension message. This action plan allows for the allocation of resources, planning and use of various tools to ensure extension messaging is well delivered. Critical stakeholders engaged in achieving these results are illustrated in Figure 1 around the service delivery hub of the MIC. The process of support to the establishment and development of capacity of the MIC to deliver services to farmers is outlined in the schematic below outlining the plan of activities in a given municipality to deliver extension message packages based on the agriculture calendar season to targeted beneficiaries. Figure 2, below. Some of the key principles involved in the identification of appropriate extension messaging involved a series of sequential steps, listed below:  Key results of the KASARD support are:    The views expressed here are those of the author. [1] Project supported 2014-2016. [2] EU FAS aims at helping farmers to better understand and meet the EU requirements for environment, public and animal health, animal welfare and the good agricultural and environmental practices. EU FAS is another aspect that Kosovo must take into consideration as it moves closer towards alignment and harmonization of legislation towards its aspirations in becoming a member state. [3] EU-European Union