Agrilinks is excited to celebrate USAID's Feed the Future Week, dedicated to raising awareness about efforts to combat hunger and build food security around the world. This year, Feed the Future week is focused on elevating the voices of women leaders, entrepreneurs, volunteers, scientists, farmers and more from the Feed the Future community worldwide. Women play a critical role in the world's food system. Women produce over 50 percent of the world’s food and comprise of 43 percent of the global agricultural labor force. They invest as much as 10 times more of their earnings than men do into their children’s nutrition. Despite this, many women remain disempowered in the agriculture sector. They often receive lower wages and have limited power to make decisions. Yet progress is being made. Case studies illustrate how women are beginning to occupy entrepreneurial and leadership roles in jobs traditionally held by men in some Feed the Future focus countries. Women are breaking ground in new areas, taking leadership roles in cooperatives, playing an active role in their family business decisions, running agricultural companies, and discovering new food solutions. This week on Agrilinks, we're excited to share these stories and lift up the voices of women making an impact in agriculture. What to Expect This Feed the Future Week on Agrilinks Stay tuned on Agrilinks for content on extension for Agrilinks’ theme month, as well as stories on women heroes in agriculture. We'll be featuring Philomin Juliana, a female scientist making food discoveries, as well as USAID’s Senior Gender Advisor for the Bureau for Food Security, Krista Jacobs. On September 18th, Krista Jacobs will be taking over Agrilinks’ Twitter handle for the Feed the Future Twitter Chat. Join the Twitter Chat on September 18th at 11 am EST by following #HerImpact. And – the conversation on women in agriculture continues in October for Agrilinks’ theme month! Share your stories of women heroes in agriculture this week and celebrate #HerImpact!