The International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) is now accepting nominations for the 2019 Paula Kantor Award for Excellence in Field Research, which honors the legacy of a visionary leader whose contributions to the feminist and social justice movements are evident across the world. The award includes a cash prize and the ability to present in front of a global audience and  promote research more broadly. Dr. Paula Kantor, Senior Scientist of Gender and Development at the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) and former Senior Rural Development Specialist at ICRW, died in the aftermath of a terrorist attack in Kabul, Afghanistan on May 13, 2015. Dr. Kantor was a leading expert on gender issues and international development, with nearly 20 years of experience in executing policy research and programmatic work related to integrating gender into agriculture and rural development. Dr. Kantor’s work was largely driven by her desire and passion to improve lives in the global south, especially those of women and girls. She was a prolific researcher who participated in and worked with several initiatives to better the lives and improve livelihoods for women in conflict-prone and terrorist-affected areas. She worked across Asia, the Middle East and Africa. In the spirit of Paula’s legacy of supporting applied research to advance the economic and social well-being of women in low-income and otherwise marginalized communities worldwide, this annual award is given to a young professional female researcher doing field research related to ICRW’s mission, along with a US$2,500 cash prize. The recipient of the award will also have the ability to present in front of an esteemed global audience — comprising those in the development, business, NGO and government sectors – and will receive opportunities to promote their research on www.icrw.org and across our social media channels. The selection jury for the Paula Kantor Award for Excellence in Field Research will be made up of distinguished professionals in the development, gender, academic, policy and research sectors. Applications are due by 11:59 p.m. EST on Friday, January 11, 2019. Click here for more information on eligibility criteria and requirements for submitting an application. For any remaining questions, please contact awards@icrw.org (link sends e-mail).