Happy Holidays! To our Agrilinks community, we’d like to say “thank you” for making this an exciting year. From posts on earth observations to discussions on nutrition, your contributions make Agrilinks a valuable place to share, learn and work towards our common goal of improved food security. So, thanks to you all, what did Agrilinks’ 2019 look like? Let’s take a closer look! Over 200 Blogs Posted and Strong Theme Month Representation To date this year, the Agrilinks community posted 215 blogs. That’s nearly one blog for every weekday! The most blogs were posted in November during our livestock theme month. In November, members published an impressive 48 blogs, covering topics from camel leasing to dairy’s role in reducing poverty. October’s gender theme month boasted the highest number of blog authors, with 46 contributors, including Maria Jones of ADM Institute for Prevention of Post-Harvest Loss, John Rivera of Lutheran World Relief,  Alejandra Vargas Garcia of IDRC, and the Feed the Future Advancing Women’s Empowerment Program. A huge thanks to all our theme months hosts this year, from private sector extension theme month to digital agriculture theme month. Most Popular Topic: Opportunities This year’s most popular topics include scholarships, funding and grants, agricultural productivity, and education and extension. Given the high interest in tools, new opportunities and resources, the Agrilinks community’s commitment to the mission of food security comes through loud and clear. The most viewed blogs this year include Food Quality and Safety in the Global Food Security Index by Barakat Mahmoud of USAID, a request for applications for a farmer-to-farmer small grant program, and a discussion on production and processing of nutrient-rich food, hosted by the USAID Advancing Nutrition project. A Global Community from South Africa to India This year, we saw the most visitors from the United States, India, Kenya, Nigeria, the United Kingdom, the Philippines, Ethiopia, Uganda, South Africa and Canada. Agrilinks’ diverse audience makes it a vibrant place to learn and share. What’s Next? In 2020, we look forward to strengthening our engagement with the Agrilinks community, sharing opportunities that excite our community, and showcasing the innovations from across the food security community. With continued involvement from the food security community, we know we can make 2020 an even stronger year. Check Off Four New Year’s Resolutions! These four New Year’s resolutions will make you feel productive and help kick off 2020 to an engaging start.