JUA Technologies is excited to announce that its Dehytray will be distributed throughout East Africa beginning December 10, 2019, by BrazAgro Ltd., a supplier of Brazilian farm machinery to the region. Dehytray is a solar drying solution for small and mid-size growers and food processors and home gardeners. Its convenient size and ease of use are backed by years of research into drying technology. It is durable, approved for food use, and designed for optimum drying of foods using natural solar energy. It is ideal for drying grains, fruit, vegetables, fish, meat, and more. When JUA Technologies’ cofounders, Klein Ileleji and Reiko Habuto Ileleji, visited Nairobi during the summer to demonstrate the Dehytray at the 6th Agritec Exhibition and Congress, they received immense interest in the product from local farmers and processors, who quickly realized its benefits to the profitability of their operations. Securing distributors across wide-ranging regions (four continents and counting) is a challenging endeavor. The company is pleased to implement this partnership with BrazAgro. BrazAgro will distribute the trays in Burundi, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda. Throughout East Africa, the Dehytray will be used to dry specialty crops like leafy green vegetables, okra, mango, bananas, guava, tubers such as cassava and sweet potato, coffee, and grains, among other food products. The Dehytray meets a high hygienic standard for sun drying of crops, is quite portable, and can be adapted into a wide range of processing operations for the farm or small to mid-size processor. The Dehytray was developed at Purdue University’s world-class Agricultural & Biological Engineering program. The research was funded partly by USAID and USDA. Field tests on drying specialty (horticultural) crops and grains using the Dehytray have been carried out in the USA (Indiana, Georgia, and California), Nigeria, Ghana, Senegal, Kenya, South Africa, and Peru. The Dehytray has been shipped to customers on four continents since it became available on the market in December 2018. The mission of JUA Technologies is to positively impact lives worldwide by improving food security and profitability in small grower agriculture. The company’s initial product, the Dehytray, harnesses renewable solar energy to dehydrate fresh foods into high-quality, shelf-stable food products for local consumption or export. For more information or product specifications, please view the JUA Technologies website or contact co-founders Klein Ileleji and Reiko Habuto Ileleji via the contact page.