This report responds to a request by USAID/Nepal that the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prepare an assessment of the sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) issues negatively impacting agricultural trade in Nepal and provide a roadmap toward developing a sound, modern SPS system. USDA Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) involvement in undertaking this assessment directly supports the U.S. Government’s Global Food Security Strategy (GFSS). This report includes recommendations that cover both short-term and long-term timelines that will assist Nepal with strengthening its SPS system, thereby better enabling the country to engage in regional and international trade and to most effectively direct future investments. SPS systems are a necessary and integral part of any agricultural development strategy[1]. As a country’s agricultural sector achieves greater production efficiencies and improved physical infrastructure, food yields and domestic food security will increase. SPS systems and regulations must be in place to ensure food is safe and wholesome for domestic consumption. SPS systems and regulations must also be in place to ensure that increased agricultural productivity will translate into higher farm incomes and reduced hunger in the form of local, regional and international market access. While many SPS concepts are understood by Nepalese officials, the government has not been able to act upon these concepts to establish a viable SPS system. The effort has been further hampered by the devolution of government to the state level after the 2017 elections, bringing forward progress on SPS issues to a veritable standstill, with critical policies and regulations in limbo as the political landscape is sorted out. Beyond the ramifications of the latest election, the assessment team found four core areas for future consideration. The recommendations in this report identify areas that need little financial support and time to areas needing greater support and time. The recommendations are also responsive to requests from the Government of Nepal (GON) in recent intergovernmental discussions such as the third U.S.–Nepal Trade Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) meeting held in April 2017 in Kathmandu. If actions are taken to address these areas, Nepal will be well on its way to achieving a viable SPS system. The four areas of significance include: While the findings in this report suggest Nepal is far from having an advanced SPS system, it is possible that the GON could establish a basic system, because it understands the need for and how an SPS system works. A basic system could be established within a five year period and would be “good enough” to ensure that food destined for both domestic and export markets is safe and complies with international trade standards. Once a basic system is established, the GON can consider additional improvements that will lead them to a more advanced system. [1] See Annex I: Sanitary and Phytosanitary Capacity Building for greater detail.