The Global Food Safety Index (GFSI) is an annual report provided by the Economist's Intelligence Unit and sponsored by Corteva Agriscience, the Agriculture Division of DowDuPont. The GFSI’s report provides a comprehensive assessment of the state of food security, including the food safety index, through a dynamic quantitative and qualitative benchmarking model, using data from reliable international organizations including the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization, the United Nation Development Program, the World Trade Organization, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the World Resources Institute, the World Bank, etc. The GFSI addresses the issues of affordability, availability and quality and safety in 113 developed and developing countries. Moreover, in 2017 the GFSI started to include an adjustment factor on natural resources and resilience. The following are the main factors/indicators used to develop GFSI: In 2018, the overall food quality and safety scores have declined in almost all countries compared with scores in 2017. The 25 highest food quality and safety index countries (shown in Figure 1) are Portugal, France, Finland, Australia, United States, Netherlands, Ireland, Norway, Sweden, Greece, Spain, Canada, South Korea, Denmark, Italy, Belgium, Austria, United Kingdom, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Switzerland, Germany, Singapore and Russia. And the 25 lowest food quality and safety index countries (shown in Figure 2) are Mozambique, Yemen, Madagascar, Zambia, Haiti, Congo, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Togo, Niger, Burundi, Bangladesh, Laos Angola, Ethiopia, Tanzania, Cambodia, Cote d’Ivoire, Malawi, Chad, Burkina Faso, Syria, Benin, Senegal and Uganda. The GFSI should be used as scientific evidence to convince policy-makers, especially in developing countries, to invest in food safety systems. This is also a guide to inform donors of the most needed developing countries for their investments.The international donor community should target more investments to promote food safety at domestic levels in developing countries instead of focusing on exports (international markets). It is time for a "globalized food safety system" and "one food safety system for all."