Cambodia experienced rapid and sustained economic growth averaging nearly eight percent per year between 1994 and 2015, ranking sixth in the world for growth and attaining middle income status in 2015. This is matched by impressive poverty reduction, which fell from 52 percent in 2004 to 13.5 percent in 2014. In spite of strong rates of poverty reduction, however, the global financial, food and fuel price crises negatively affected Cambodia’s economic growth in 2009. The poorest 20 percent were the worst affected, experiencing the biggest reduction in consumption during and after the crisis. In turn, many who managed to escape poverty remain close to the poverty line and a very large proportion of the population is concentrated at the bottom of the income distribution. Research by the Chronic Poverty Advisory Network (CPAN), supported by USAID’s Center for Resilience, investigated the extent and drivers of transitory and sustained escapes from poverty across a series of country studies to better understand the sources of resilience that enable people to sustainably escape poverty given the complex risk environments in which they live. Specifically, this research examined why some households escape and remain out of poverty (sustainable poverty escape), while other households escape it only to fall back into poverty (transitory poverty escape) and still others descend into poverty for the first time (impoverishment). Building on research conducted through the Leveraging Economic Opportunity activity in Bangladesh, Ethiopia and Uganda in 2016, the current body of research was aimed at expanding understanding of the drivers of sustained and transitory poverty escapes and teasing out policy and programming implications for USAID and other development actors. This report combines analysis from four rounds of the panel Agriculture, Rural Development and Poverty Reduction Survey in Cambodia spanning 2008-2017 with qualitative research approaches, in particular, key informant interviews, life histories and participatory wealth ranking in six study sites across Cambodia major agro-ecological zones to further investigate the drivers of changes in poverty status. Analysis for this case study reveals that just under one fifth of households escaped poverty sustainably, while almost the same share (20 percent) escaped only to fall back in or became impoverished for the first time, over the study period. There is considerable dynamism in rural household poverty status, with almost four in five households living in poverty during at least one of the 2008-17 survey years. The following factors are among those found to contribute to sustainable poverty escapes in Cambodia, according to the analysis: Initial household resource base Household characteristics Household activities Household shocks and stressors See the sidebar for the full case study and accompanying policy brief, which presents policy implications for sustaining poverty escapes in rural Cambodia that emerge from the analysis presented in this study.