Since 2000 Malawi has achieved four of the eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) including those on reducing child mortality and combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases. The country started the MDGs with a particularly low base compared to other countries, making achievement of these four goals more remarkable. However, Malawi remains one of the poorest countries in the world. The incidence of ultra-poverty (consumption below the food poverty line) actually increased between 2000 and 2015 from 24 to 26 percent; absolute numbers of people living in poverty also increased during the 15-year period, as did the depth of poverty. Meanwhile, natural hazards and climate change are affecting the country’s predominantly agricultural economy, resulting in a series of economic losses, periods of food insecurity and humanitarian responses. Through the National Resilience Plan, Malawi has a strategy to move away from cyclical humanitarian response to resilient development, through strengthening coordination, pooling resources and prioritizing environmental management. Research by CPAN supported by USAID’s Center for Resilience investigated the extent and drivers of transitory and sustained escapes from poverty across a series of country studies to better understand the sources of resilience that enable people to sustainably escape poverty given the complex risk environments in which they live. Specifically, this research examined why some households escape and remain out of poverty (sustainable poverty escape), while other households escape it only to fall back into poverty (transitory poverty escape) and still others descend into poverty for the first time (impoverishment). Building on research conducted through the Leveraging Economic Opportunity activity in Bangladesh, Ethiopia and Uganda in 2016, the current body of research was aimed at expanding understanding of the drivers of sustained and transitory poverty escapes and teasing out policy and programming implications for USAID and other development actors.The Malawi report combines analysis from two rounds of the Malawi Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS, in 2010 and 2013) with qualitative research incorporating key informant interviews, life histories and focus group discussions in Balaka and Mchinji districts to investigate the drivers of poverty escapes. Analysis of the IHPS shows that while 15 per cent of households escaped poverty between 2010 and 2013, 14 percent moved back into poverty over the three years and 19 percent remained in chronic poverty. Key findings to explain the reasons for poverty ascents and descents at the household level include: Household resource base Household capacities and attributes Household activities Shocks and trends In this context, life histories indicate that the key strategy in sustaining escapes from poverty was through diversification in livelihoods both across and within sectors, together with the ability to maneuver into new economic activities quickly when prices change. Download the full report, as well as the accompanying policy implications brief, from the sidebar.