The USAID Feed the Future Learning Community for Supply Chain Resilience is happy to share the launch of a new website aimed to provide coffee companies with the resources they need to combat climate change. The Climate Smart Coffee website, launched in early May, was created to increase private sector engagement and funding in smallholder farmer resilience against climate change.  Designed to guide medium and large companies, who buy from and support smallholder coffee value chains, the website identifies relevant areas of engagement and investment in adaptation to climate change. Highlighting information from leading knowledge platforms like coffee&climate, Global Coffee Platform, Specialty Coffee Association, and Conservation International’s Sustainable Coffee Challenge, the Climate Smart Coffee website includes research work completed by the USAID Feed the Future Alliance for Resilient Coffee, CCAFS Mainstreaming Climate Smart Value Chains initiative and other key partners. Climate Smart Coffee includes the “Basics” of climate-smart agriculture and information on “what role companies can play?” and “how different companies are acting on climate change?”.  The “Take Action” portion of the website allows users to follow a simple process laid out in the Introduction to Assessing Climate Resilience in Smallholder Supply Chains. Throughout the website coffee companies can follow links to tools and resources offered by leaders in the field. The website design and information is created to provide easy and accessible information to building resilience within any coffee supply chain.  The Climate Smart Coffee website is a sister site to the forthcoming Climate Smart Cocoa website, created by CIAT and Rainforest Alliance/Utz and designed for cocoa companies.  The Climate Smart Coffee website was created by CIAT and the Sustainable Food Lab.  Led by the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), the CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) is a collaboration among all 15 CGIAR Research Centers, including IITA.  With help from the Rainforest Alliance, Root Capital and the Sustainable Food Lab, the consortium provides the evidence-based science behind the Climate Smart Coffee website.