This post was written by Akhter Ahmed Ph.D., International Food Policy Research Institute; John Hoddinott, DPhil., Cornell University; Paul Tanger, Ph.D., USAID; Lesley Perlman, USAID  Eggplant, known as brinjal in Bangladesh, is a high-value crop that is widely grown and consumed throughout the country. 150,000 farmers grow brinjal in Bangladesh and it ranks third after potato and rice among crops in the country in terms of quantity consumed. It is a critical piece of Bangladesh’s food security puzzle. However, brinjal is highly susceptible to the fruit and shoot borer (FSB) pest. FSB is a moth whose larvae bore into the stem and fruit of brinjal. Infestations can lead to yield losses as high as 86 percent [1], a devastating hit for smallholder farmers with whom Feed the Future works. To fight this pest, farmers spray their crops heavily with toxic pesticides. Studies have found that farmers spray from as few as 23 times to as much as 140 times per season [2]. This intense amount of spraying can have harmful effects on the health of farmers, their families, the consumers of the fruit, and the environment. To address this insidious pest, a diverse set of partners, including the Bangladesh Agriculture Research Institute (BARI), Maharashtra Hybrid Seeds Co. Pvt. Ltd. (Mahyco), Cornell University, and Feed the Future, developed brinjal varieties with a protein (Bt, specifically Cry1Ac) that provides protection from FSB intended to reduce FSB infestation and the need for toxic pesticides.  The International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), BARI, and the Bangladesh Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE), with support from USAID, have now completed an independent impact evaluation, Impacts of Bt Brinjal (Eggplant) Technology in Bangladesh, to determine the impacts of Bt brinjal on pest infestation, pesticide use, crop yields, costs, revenues, and self-reported health outcomes. The study shows exciting results of how Bt brinjal can lead to real improvements in the lives of farmers. Bt brinjal leads to a:  Scaled up, these results imply that the cultivation of Bt brinjal could prevent the application of over 230,000 liters of pesticide nationwide. IFPRI designed a randomized controlled trial (RCT) study to estimate the impacts of Bt brinjal in four districts in northwest Bangladesh where winter brinjal cultivation is prominent, physical infrastructure is relatively good, and the brinjal markets are well-functioning. Bt brinjal-4, the variety tested in this study that grows round green eggplants, is one of four Bt varieties that has been approved for cultivation in Bangladesh. At the study outset, 1,200 farmers in 200 villages (six farmers per village) were identified as being willing to participate in the study. Half of the villages were randomly selected to grow Bt brinjal-4, and half were randomly selected to grow a conventional variety (ISD-006), identical to Bt brinjal-4, except for the genetic distinction that allows Bt brinjal-4 to repel FSB.  Farmers in the study planted their brinjal on 10 decimal plots, equivalent to 0.04 hectares or 400 square meters, in November 2017. All farmers received a small package of inputs including fertilizers, pheromone traps, sticky traps, and netting to prevent birds from eating the fruit with a value of about $24. None of the farmers received pesticide.  Replicating what would happen during the scale-up of Bt brinjal, farmers who received Bt brinjal seedlings and those who received the conventional ISD-006 seedlings were trained on the same integrated pesticide management practices by DAE officials. Farmers growing Bt brinjal also received guidance from BARI and DAE on maintaining a non-Bt brinjal border, a line of conventional brinjal grown around the Bt-brinjal plants, to help prevent insects from developing resistance to Bt. IFPRI collected data from farmers before the study (baseline) and following the harvest season in July 2018 (endline). At endline, the study not only showed that the Bt brinjal variety dramatically reduced FSB infestation, but it also showed reductions in pesticide use and increases in productivity and profits. At baseline, all farmers reported an FSB infestation rate of 35.5 percent for the previous season.[3] At endline, the rate of FSB infestation in Bt brinjal plants was only 1.8 percent. In contrast, the rate of FSB infestation in the non-Bt brinjal plants was 33.9 percent.[4] Not only did the Bt brinjal ward off FSB, but it also showed lower levels of infestations from other beetles, aphids, mites, and pests.  Although Bt brinjal farmers did not receive any special instructions on reducing pesticide use, there was a 51 percent reduction in the number of pesticide applications among Bt brinjal farmers. On average, they sprayed 7.4 times less than non-Bt brinjal farmers.   Bt brinjal farmers also saw a 47 percent reduction in the cost of applying pesticides, saving $85.18 per hectare. Not only did the study show a reduction in the cost of applying pesticides, but it also showed that farmers applied 39 percent less pesticides. This means Bt brinjal farmers applied around 4,616 ml or gm per hectare less pesticides compared with non-Bt brinjal farmers. Based on the type of pesticides and the decrease in the number of pesticides, there was a 41 percent reduction in the toxicity of pesticides applied, as measured by the Pesticide Use Toxicity Score, and a 56 percent reduction in environmental toxicity, as measured by the Field Use Environmental Impact Quotient. Percentage of farmers using pesticides for fruit and shoot borer by toxicity level (endline)  Net yields[5] (kilograms produced per hectare of brinjal cultivated) were 42 percent higher for Bt brinjal farmers, equivalent to a 3,622 kg per hectare increase. These increases in net yields were widespread and occurred because Bt brinjal farmers produced more brinjal and discarded fewer fruits after harvest. It cost Bt brinjal farmers $113.87 per hectare less to grow Bt brinjal. Much of the 31 percent reduction in the cost of growing a kilogram of brinjal is due to reduced pesticides. Farmers earned an additional $400.41 per hectare in net profits. This 13.9 percent increase in profits is due primarily to savings from decreased pesticide cost and increased the productivity of Bt brinjal. Farmers and their families growing Bt brinjal reported fewer symptoms consistent with pesticide exposure. Individuals in households growing Bt brinjal were 10 percent less likely to report symptoms consistent with pesticide exposure and 6.5 percentage points less likely to report that they needed to seek medical care for these symptoms. These results are statistically significant. Both men and women from households growing Bt brinjal were less likely to report symptoms consistent with pesticide exposure. Reductions in reported symptoms were larger for individuals who, at baseline, reported symptoms related to chronic respiratory illnesses or skin disease.  Smallholder farmers in Bangladesh face constant challenges. From worsening natural disasters to depleted soils, there are frequently unexpected and expected obstacles. But for farmers who have been consistently devastated by the FSB, Bt brinjal holds promise to improve their lives, from bettering the health of their families and community and increasing their profits to lessening the impact on consumers and the environment from pesticides. Bt brinjal could have long-term, positive impacts on the food security and health of people in Bangladesh.  While the impact study results were subject to various factors during the years assessed (2017-2018), and both year-to-year and geographical variations in weather, precipitation, and other factors influence brinjal performance, if these estimates are extrapolated on a national level, reduced pesticide costs could save farmers over $2.7 million and net profits could increase farmers’ income by over $14 million. [1]  Ali, M.I., M.S. Ali, and M. S. Rahman. 1980. “Field evaluation of wilt disease and shoot and fruit borer attack of different cultivars of brinjal.” Bangladesh Journal of Agricultural Science 7: 193–194. [2] Rashid, M.H., M. Mohiuddin, and M.A. Mannan. 2008. “Survey and Identification of Major Insect Pest and Pest Management Practices of Brinjal During Winter at Chittagong District.” International Journal of Sustainable Crop Production, 3(2): 27–32.; Dey, N.C. 2010. “Use of Pesticides in Vegetable Farms and its Impact on Health of Farmers and Environment.” Environmental Science & Technology (II): 134–140.; Sabur, S.A., and A.R. Molla. 2001. “Pesticide Use, its Impact on Crop Production and Evaluation of IPM Technologies in Bangladesh.” Bangladesh Journal of Agricultural Economics, 24(1-2): 1–18.; Ahsanuzzaman, and D. Zilberman. 2018. “Bt Eggplant in Bangladesh Increases Yields and Farmers’ Incomes, and Reduces Pesticide Use.” ARE Update 22(2): 5–8. University of California Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics.;Raza, M.S. 2018. “Present Status of Insecticides Use for the Cultivation Of Brinjal in Kushtia Region, Bangladesh.” International Journal of Engineering Science Invention, 7(1): 44–51. [3] For this study infestation was calculated by multiplying the percentage of plots infested by the percentage of plants infested on infested plots. [4] The difference in plant-level infestation between Bt brinjal and non-Bt brinjal plots is statistically significant at the 1% level. [5] Net production is quantity harvested in kg minus fruit discarded for any other reason, including damage due to pests or other diseases. ________________________________ 